Added new post about itt criteria (#852)
DFE-Digital/bat-design-history: app/posts/manage-teacher-training-applications/2023-03-14-helping-users-decide-if-candidates-meet-the-itt-criteria.md

---
title: Helping users decide if candidates meet the initial teacher training criteria

> description: Why we decided to simplify the list of reasons for rejecting a candidate, and what the research told us

Author: Oops, I forgot to update that, I think that's a direct copy of yours!

date: 2023-03-14
tags:
  - rejections
ogImage:
  src: /manage-teacher-training-applications/helping-users-assess-candidates-against-itt-criteria/itt-criteria-flow.png
  alt: "Illustration containing 5 screens: Each screen has a question relating to the initial teacher training criteria. If users answer 'Yes' to every question, they go to a page to give a reason for rejecting the candidate. If users answer 'No' to one or more of the questions, they go to a page where they can give optional feedback to the candidate."
---

![Illustration containing five screens: The first screen has a heading of 'Degree criteria' followed by a green arrow to screen 2 with a heading of 'English GCSE criteria', followed by a green arrow to screen 3 with a heading of 'Maths GCSE criteria', followed by a green arrow to screen 4. Screen 4 has a heading of 'Reason for rejection'. Users would land on this screen if all their previous answers are 'Yes'. Screen 5 has a heading of 'Optional reasons for rejection'. Users would land on this page if they answered 'No' to one of more of the questions on screen 1, 2 and 3.](itt-criteria-flow.png)

> Since the 2022 to 2023 recruitment cycle started in October 2022, we’re seeing more candidates being rejected and fewer providers making offers.

Reviewer: This is just a suggestion, but is it worth trying to expand this first paragraph to summarise the whole post (for people who TL;DR) and then moving the paragraphs below into the "The issue" section?

The second highest reason training providers use to reject candidates is ‘qualifications’.

Candidates need to have the following qualifications to do initial teacher training (ITT) in England:

* an undergraduate degree from a UK higher education institution or equivalent qualification
* a standard equivalent to grade 4 or C GCSE in English and maths
* a standard equivalent to grade 4 or C GCSE in a science subject (if they’re applying to teach primary)

[The ITT criteria is published for training providers on GOV.UK](https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/initial-teacher-training-criteria/initial-teacher-training-itt-criteria-and-supporting-advice).

## The issue

> Previous reporting showed that candidates who are rejected based on their qualifications, are often from outside the UK and sometimes hold equivalent qualifications.

Reviewer: Not sure comma is needed here? "Equivalent qualifications" might need a bit more context (do we mean GCSEs here?).

```suggestion
Previous reporting showed that candidates who are rejected based on their qualifications often have qualifications from outside the UK or qualifications from the UK that aren’t GCSEs but are equivalent.
```

> We also saw that eligible candidates are sometimes rejected for reasons outside their control. For example, a candidate applies to a History course, but they have a degree in science.

Reviewer: not quite sure what "outside their control" means here?

We believe there is a lot of interpretation and ambiguity in the ITT criteria. This leads to training providers being unsure on how to assess candidates, especially if they have equivalent qualifications.

> We wanted to test provider’s understanding of the ITT criteria so that we can better support them when they make decisions about candidates.

Reviewer: Plural apostrophe here? 🤔 

```suggestion
We wanted to test providers’ understanding of the ITT criteria so that we can better support them when they make decisions about candidates.
```

We also wanted to understand more about how providers assess candidates and who makes the final decision on an application.

## What we changed

> As part of the work we did to [revisit the reasons for rejection](/manage-teacher-training-applications/revisiting-reasons-for-rejection/), when a training provider decides to reject a candidate we added specific questions about if the candidate met the ITT criteria or not.

Reviewer: This tripped me up slightly on first read - might be better if last two clauses were swapped?

```suggestion
As part of the work we did to [revisit the reasons for rejection](/manage-teacher-training-applications/revisiting-reasons-for-rejection/), we added specific questions about if the candidate met the ITT criteria or not when a training provider decides to reject a candidate.
```

### Degree criteria question

We added a question about if a candidate had a degree or not. This question would only show if the candidate had entered a degree in their application form that was not recognisable. For example, a degree from a country outside the UK.

We included a snippet taken directly from the ITT criteria about degrees. We did this to purposefully test if the language was understandable to training providers.

![Screenshot showing a page with the heading 'Degree criteria ' and the question 'Do they meet the degree criteria'. This page also shows the candidates degree from the application form and a snippet from the ITT criteria about how many credits a candidate's degree should have'](degree-question-page.png)

### English, maths and science GCSE criteria questions

After the degree question, we included questions about if the candidate has an English and maths GCSE or equivalent. Again, these questions would only show if the candidate had entered a school qualification in their application form that was not recognisable.

> We also included a snippet from the ITT criteria about GCSEs. We were particularly interested in finding out what training providers understood by “it is the standard, not the certificate, that matters” in the criteria. As we thought this is particularly unclear.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We also included a snippet from the ITT criteria about GCSEs. We were particularly interested in finding out what training providers understood by “it is the standard, not the certificate, that matters” in the criteria, as we thought this was particularly unclear.
```

![Screenshot showing a page with the heading 'English GCSE criteria ' and the question 'Do they meet the standard equivalent to a grade 4 (C) English GCSE?'. This page also shows the candidates English qualification from the application form and a snippet from the ITT criteria about meeting this criteria'](english-gcse-question.png)

![Screenshot showing a page with the heading 'Maths GCSE criteria ' and the question 'Do they meet the standard equivalent to a grade 4 (C) maths GCSE?'. This page also shows the candidates maths qualification from the application form and a snippet from the ITT criteria about meeting this criteria'](maths-gcse-question.png)

> The question about science GCSEs would only show if a candidate was applying to a Primary course and their science qualification was not recognisable.

Reviewer: Are we meant to capitalise "Primary" or not, I can never remember?

### Optional extra feedback

If the training provider answered ‘No’ to any of the questions about if the candidate met the ITT criteria, we show another page where training providers could give ‘optional’ extra feedback on other aspects of the candidate’s application.

We made this optional because by answering ‘No’ to any of the previous questions about the ITT criteria, the training provider would have already given some feedback to the candidate.

![Screenshot showing a page with the heading 'Give Peter Essien any other feedback (optional)'. Beneath this is a set of 9 checkboxes labelled with different reasons. Beneath this is a green ‘Continue’ button.'](optional-feedback.png)

If the training provider had answered ‘Yes’ to all of the questions about if the candidate met the ITT criteria, we show a page where the provider must give the candidate feedback on why they are rejecting their application.

> ![Screenshot showing a page with the heading ‘Feedback for Peter Essien’. Beneath the heading is a exclaimation mark icon and the bolded text ‘You must not reject candidates for a lack of experience working in a school’. Beaneath this is the subheading ‘Tell Peter Essien why you are rejecting their application’. Beneath this is a set of 9 checkboxes labelled with different reasons. Beneath this is text box with the label ‘Give Peter Essien advice on what to do next. For example, “You should apply again to a different course”’. Beneath this is a green ‘Continue’ button.](feedback-page.png)

Reviewer: Could drop this as it’s covered by the other design history entry?

Most issues were around the ITT criteria itself, which our team does not have control over. We found that training providers:

* hold the ITT criteria in high regard, and refer to it often when assessing candidates
* feel there is a lot of ‘grey areas’ in the ITT criteria, especially when assessing “tricky” qualifications
* find assessing international candidate’s qualifications the most time consuming – this may be leading to them rejecting these candidate prematurely
* feel a third class degree is not strong enough for ITT – some providers mentioned that candidates need a 2:2 degree or higher to get a bursary from DfE which suggests that DfE thinks that 3rd class degrees are not the best
* are not clear on the rules around if the degree subject should match the course subject
* thought that the line “it’s the standard, not the certificate that matters” is too vague for them to use in practice
* have more difficulty in assessing GCSEs against the criteria than degrees

## Future considerations

> As a team, we do not have control over the ITT criteria. However, our user researcher and policy colleagues will play this research back to the team who look after the ITT criteria on GOV.UK, so that they can use this to make the guidance clearer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a team, we do not have control over the ITT criteria. However, our user researcher and policy colleagues have discussed this research with the team who look after the ITT criteria on GOV.UK, so that they can use this to make the guidance clearer.
```

We think these designs can help training providers give better feedback to candidates and help them keep the ITT criteria in mind.

> As part of this work, we also tested designs where a training provider can recommend a candidate to other training providers if they meet the ITT criteria.

Reviewer: Feels like a tantalising paragraph to end on! Should we drop this, as it’ll have a whole separate post (or were you thinking that we’d link to it here)?

Author: Yeah, plan is to link to it. Just need to remember to do that...
